Waxillium is a descendant of Edgard Ladrian and Allrianne Cett. He is of mixed heritage, with Terris on his mother's side and Noble on his father's side,[12] and he is said to have more Terris blood than most.[8] He was raised under a noble house and lived a life of luxury--something he detested.[13] He and his sister, Telsin, were mostly raised by their uncle in Elendel.[8] At the age of 12, his uncle began grooming him to run the family-operated First Central Bank. Wax became disgusted by the unethical practices of the bank and distanced himself from the role.[14]
The Village

At the age of 15, Wax spent a year living in the Village, with the option to stay if he wished. During his last months in the Village, he encountered Forch, a Twinborn Terris boy who committed arson. Wax investigated the crime and brought his evidence to the attention of the constables, but this was ultimately disregarded by his grandmother who insisted that the Terris people manage themselves and their criminals. Wax unintentionally spotted Forch later that night and believed he was going to commit arson again. Investigating further, Wax unknowingly stumbled upon Forch attempting to dissect a living boy he had kidnapped. Despite being heavily outmatched by another Twinborn, Wax ultimately killed Forch in self defense during a Steelpushing battle, rescuing the child from him.[15] This is when Wax decides to leave the Village and strike out on his own.
The Roughs

In his early years in the Roughs, Wax developed an image of himself as a "Gentleman Bounty Hunter"; although initially incompetent and unfamiliar with his Twinborn abilities, he would eventually hone them. He pro-actively worked with other law enforcers in the area, eventually working with Jon Deadfinger and finding a 17 year old Wayne who he would ultimately spare from execution and turn his life around to become a lawman.[16]

During a bounty claim on Granite Joe, he would encountered Lessie--a woman he would fall in love with and eventually marry.[16]

After the reported death of his uncle, Wax was implored to return to Elendel to begin managing the ledgers of his house. Initially ignoring this request, Wax chose instead to hunt the murderous Bloody Tan as his final bounty. In a horrifying turn of events, Waxillium mistakenly shot Lessie in the forehead when he attempted to free her from Bloody Tan's clutches. With nothing left for him in the Roughs, Wax returned to his family mansion in Elendel.[17]
Return to Elendel

    “He always felt stronger in the mists. He felt like someone was watching, when he was out in them.”
    —Wax thinks of the mists[18]

In his early months in Elendel, Wax earned a reputation for frequently disappearing early from social functions, preferring to steel-push through the mists, in patrol of the city. On one such night, Waxillium paused his patrol and intervened in a shootout. Believing he heard a woman's whimper, which reminded him of Lessie, Wax froze during the gunfight. Coming to the conclusion that he was no longer capable of being a lawman, and with the effectiveness of the city constabulary forcing him to face the irrelevance of vigilante justice in general, Wax hung up his guns for good.[10]

Throwing himself into the much more mundane effort of saving his house's financial future, Waxillium spent half a year working to reverse his late uncle's squandering of the family funds. Believing there was no other choice, he entered into a marriage agreement with Lord Harms' daughter, Steris, hopeful that her father's money would help bring House Ladrian back from the brink of destitution. That same day, Wayne, an old partner from his time in the Roughs, re-entered Wax's life--carrying with him an aluminum bullet and a tantalizing mystery surrounding a gang of train robbers known as the Vanishers, which threatened to draw Wax away from his house responsibilities and right back into the life of a lawman.[7] 